The Dorian Principle, a biblical response to the commercialization of Christianity by
Conley Owens, Chapter 10, The Testimony of History, Claim vs Evidence.
In 2008, Tom Biscardi snagged a significant amount of camera time when he claimed that
he had discovered the carcass of a Sasquatch.
Someone had finally found Bigfoot, except he had not.
Rather predictably, the animal turned out to be nothing more than a rubber costume shoved
into a freezer.
I suppose there will always be believers in Bigfoot, but I am relatively certain no such
creature exists.
No one has ever found the beast or captured convincing video of it.
What's more, no one has ever found an authentic Sasquatch track or even Sasquatch droppings.
Things that exist leave traces of their existence.
It's a simple fact of reality.
A claim is only a claim apart from evidence.
Similarly, true apostolic practices leave their mark on the church.
If the Dorian Principle was practiced by the apostles in the first century, we should
expect to see traces of this practice in the second century.
Even if the church experienced times of radical transition, we should expect to see some evidence
of this ethic.
I believe that when we look to the pages of history, that is exactly what we find.
In the last chapter, we examine the practice of the Dorian Principle in the first century
church.
In this chapter, we will examine its practice in the following century.
After establishing the second century church fully embraced this ethic, we will briefly
look at how the Protestant Reformation attempted to recapture it.
The Didikai
Quite possibly the oldest extrabiblical Christian writing, the Didikai functions as a manual of church
practice.
Also known as the Teaching of the Twelve Apostles, it attempts to capture apostolic doctrine
and the practice of the church into an orderly guide.
Despite these lofty goals, it draws from Matthew to the exclusion of the other gospels,
and possibly to the exclusion of all other New Testament books.
This document does not attempt to forge new ground or expand upon previous revelation,
but only to apply what had already been provided by available scripture.
However, this is largely to our advantage since we have founded our own understanding of
Biblical fundraising ethics on Matthew 10-8-10.
In other words, the Didikai helps us answer the question, "How did the early church apply
Jesus' words in Matthew?"
The Didikai's importance stems largely from its early authorship, dating to the mid to
late first century.
The primitive simplicity of the Didikai's teaching, as well as its silence on persecution,
provide the strongest arguments for a first century date.
However, perhaps the early date should not impress us as much as the respected garnered
from the early church.
For example, the early church historian Eusebius lists the Didikai among true Orthodox writings,
and Athanasius, the early theologian who defended the doctrine of the Trinity, includes
it among books approved for baptismal candidates.
Additionally, the Didikai appears to be referenced by Clement of Alexandria and other early Christian
witnesses, Ignatius arguably being among their ranks.
This support for the Didikai confirms that it largely represents the early church's
understanding of the practical matters it addresses.
Given this brief overview of the document, we can conclude with some degree of confidence
that where the Didikai offers guidance on ministry fundraising.
Its instruction emerges from an evaluation of New Testament sources, and that its judgments
were largely shared by the early 2nd century church.
Further, given its early date, one may reasonably conclude that its prescriptions do not stray
far from the practice of the Apostolic Church.
At most, it represents a minor evolution from the original pattern of the church, rather
than a freshly designed program.
With that in mind, we turn to the relevant text.
Let every Apostle, when he cometh to you, be it received as the Lord, but he shall not
abide more than a single day, or if there be need, a second likewise, but if he abide
three days, he is a false prophet, and when he departed, let the Apostle received nothing
save bread until he find his shelter.
And if he asks money, he is a false prophet.
And whoever shall say in the Spirit, give me silver or anything else, you shall not listen
to him.
But if he tell you to give on behalf of others that are in want, let no man judge him.
Didikai11.4-6-12.
Clearly, the Didikai takes serious precautions against itinerant teachers who would take advantage
of the church.
In a different context, it labels anyone who wrongly accepts the support of the Christian
community, a trafficker in Christ, or Christmonger, didikai12.5.
We may identify several prohibitions here.
1.
Staying in a home for three or more days.
2.
Taking more than bread for one's journey.
3.
Taking for money for one's journey.
On the surface, several points stand at odds with our conclusion from the former chapters.
Benjamin Franklin quiped that fish and visitors stink after three days.
But beyond this humor, it is not clear why there would be a prohibition against prolonged
hospitality.
Especially if Paul is willing to spend the entire winter with the Corinthians.
The ban on accepting money for a journey likewise seems out of step with the previous covered
notion of pro-Pimpos support.
The confusion arises from the fact that the Didikai speaks to an established Christian
people, yet appears to prohibit them from co-laboring.
However, clarity arises from recognizing that this paragraph addresses a profit of questionable
veracity.
Didikai11.13.
Visitors are to recognize him as a true profit, in part, by the ethic he exhibits in managing
his own support among unknown people.
Prior to such a demonstration, the people should treat him with a healthy caution.
Regarding one firmly identified as a true profit, the Didikai readily acknowledges that
he is worthy of his food, Didikai13.1, and deserves the first fruit of money, possessions,
etc.
Didikai13.7.
Since we have seen these instructions most clearly pronounced in the epistles of Paul, I find
it especially fascinating that the author of the Didikai apparently arises at these conclusions
apart from a clear knowledge of the Apostles writings.
In other words, the Didikai indicates that Jesus established a Dorian Principle, and that
it may be understood in the Gospel of Matthew without appealing to any later developments.
Prior to Paul's rejection of hospitality when arriving in Corinth, Thessalonica, in Ephesus,
the church understood that it is unbecoming for a minister of Christ to support himself
by receiving direct payment from his converts.
The Shepherd of Hermas
A similar, albeit more specific, concern arises in the Shepherd of Hermas.
As with the Didikai, the Shepherd is a Christian writing that was widely respected by the early
church.
Once again, this indicates that its judgments are largely representative of those held by
the early church, reflecting the Council's scripture.
The Shepherd of Hermas warns against greedy prophets who willingly say anything for the
sake of gain, Shepherd 43.233.8.
As a precautionary measure against such things, it decries private prophecy, demanding
that teachers teach plainly and openly in a Christian assembly, Shepherd 43.13 through
14.
However, perhaps its most direct rebuk of false prophets comes in the form of a condemnation
of ministerial reciprocity.
In the first place, that man who seemed to have a spirit exalted himself, and desire to
have a chief place, and straight way he is impudent and shameless and talkative and
conversant in many luxuries, and in many other deceits and receiveeth money for his prophesying.
And if he receiveeth not, he prophesiedeth not.
Now can a divine spirit receive money and prophesy?
It is not possible for a prophet of God to do this, but the spirit of such prophets is
earthly, Shepherd 43.12.
And forbidding the requirement of remuneration, the Shepherd does not clearly prohibit the
acceptance of remuneration.
However, it goes on and say that a divine spirit cannot receive money and prophesy.
Here, the Shepherd offers an unqualified rejection of ministerial reciprocity.
It rejects as insincere any who would receive in direct exchange for teaching.
Apolognes
Not much is known of apolognes of Ephesus, but his writings warrant mention for their status
as early Christian witnesses to the practices of the church.
These writings no longer exist in a complete form, but the early church historian Eusebius
recorded his contensions with the heretic mountainous of mountainous apolognes reports.
This is he who appointed collectors of money, who contrived the receiving of gifts under
the name of offerings, who provided salaries for those who preached his doctrine, that
its teaching might prevail through gluttony.
Clearly, apolognes opposes greedy accumulation of wealth, although it is less clear why he
objects to salaries in particular.
It seems likely that he protests the nature of the commission, pay offered in return for
preaching.
Regardless, it is plain that apolognes opposes prophets accepting gifts in the context
of their ministry.
Thus not all scriptures seem to you to forbid a prophet to receive gifts in money.
When therefore I see the prophetess Priska receiving gold in silver and costly garments,
how can I avoid reproving her?
If they deny that their prophets have received gifts, let them acknowledge this, that if they
are convicted of receiving them, they are not prophets.
Notably, apolognes appeals to Christ as he promotes his ethic.
For although the Lord said to provide neither gold nor silver, neither two coats, these men
in complete opposition transgress in respect to the possession of the forbidden things, for
we will show that those whom they call prophets and martyrs gather their gain not only from
rich men, but also from the poor and orphans and widows.
Depending on how we understand apolognes, one could argue that he strays from the Dorian
principle, rejecting all financial support for ministers rather than merely rejecting ministerial
reciprocity.
However, congregational support has always been a common feature in churches, even in the
first and second century.
For apolognes to take particular issue with mountainous, the false prophets practice must
have deviated beyond the typical practice, possessing a more commercial character.
Regardless, apolognes appeals to the common understanding of the church and points to
some divergent practice in the set of mountainous.
Whether apolognes' biblical understanding is accurate or not, it represents the second
century Christian mindset, which was formed in influence by first century Christian practices.
In other words, even apart from perfect agreement, these objections to payment confirm the
second century church affirmed something akin to the Dorian principle.
Those familiar with church history might know that in the course of his contending against
mountainous, apolognes incurred the rebuke of Tertullian, one of the most important second
century theologians.
But on this point, the two were agreed, as Tertullian writes, "There is no buying and selling
of any sort in the things of God."
Martin Luther flash forward to the Protestant Reformation.
In the first three centuries of the church, we see the ripples and echoes of the Dorian principle
in play.
But the 16th century concerns us for an altogether different reason.
The eventual corruption of the church had led to a degradation in fundraising practices.
Rather than having the opportunity to maintain the apostolic practice, the reformers found
themselves saddled with the task of restoring a biblical view of money.
In fact, while the Reformation centered around the doctrines of scripture and salvation,
the relationship between money and ministry was arguably the primary catalyst of the Reformation.
In the early 16th century, the sale of indulgences, reductions on time spent in purgatory, financed
the construction of St. Peter's Basilica in the Vatican.
In Germany, this effort was led by Johann Tetzel, a friar whose marketing skills have been
immortalized in the following couplet, as soon as a coin in the coffer rings, a soul from
purgatory to heaven springs.
German priest Martin Luther, 1483–1546, objected to this commercial treatment of salvation.
And on October 31, 1517, he nailed his 95 feces against the sale of indulgences to the
door of all Saints Church in Wittenberg.
This act of defiance sparked the Protestant Reformation, the largest religious and cultural
revolution the Western world had ever experienced.
Luther believed the minister was obligated to be selfless in his office and saw the calling
of pastor to be one of the imitation of Christ in his sacrifice.
Concerning the Pope, he writes, "Is it not his duty to do all that he can for all Christians
without reward solely for God's sake, may even to shed his blood for them?"
He goes as far as to say that a ministry endeavor that seeks to raise money lacks the marks
of divine approval.
As we see, every project of men bears money, the word of God bears nothing but the cross.
Of course, Luther also believes ministers should receive regular support in order to sustain
the proclamation of the gospel.
On one hand, it seems clear that Luther roughly affirmed the Dorean principle, denying that
the message of salvation should be sold after affirming that congregants should support
their ministers.
However, his writings never ventured much farther than a rebuke of extremes.
Other figures in the Protestant Reformation voiced similar concerns, but in my estimation,
none ever made it quite as far as to articulate a robust ethic distinguishing the wrongful
and rightful receipt of money in ministry.
Conclusion
Looking back on the pages of history, we see that the second century church maintained
the apostolic practice of the Dorean principle.
Moreover, they understood this ethic to be a scriptural precept, defending it largely
from the gospel of Matthew.
Unlike Bigfoot, the teaching of the Dorean principle in the first century church left traces
in the following century that corroborates its prevalence among the churches founded
by the apostles.
Later, after centuries of increased disregard in the church at large, the reformers recognized
the need to restore a biblical ethic of ministry fundraising.
By and large, they determined that scripture forbids the sale of ministry, and yet commands
the support of ministers.
However, these reformers were largely satisfied to counter the extremes of greed and neglect.
The work begun at the time of the Reformation remains in need of completion.
For those who wish to take up that mantle, I believe that the Dorean principle holds
the keys to properly articulating the biblical ethic and putting it into practice.
End of chapter 10